there's this constant breach obviously
with gender ideology there's that breach
with a lot of culture War issues with
the question of gigantic corporations
between the views of the elite class and
the views of the vast majority people
over whom they're ruling and when you
have this kind of mass populist anger
traditionally the elites can try and
appease it or the society can say you
know what let them Riot we'll just
militarize to the teeth we'll give
ourselves every kind of power and weapon
that we need so that even if they want
to Riot they'll be crushed immediately I
think the West is choosing that latter
[Music]
path hello everyone watching and
listening today I'm speaking with author
journalist and political commentator
Glenn Greenwall
we discussed the war on Miss and
disinformation how a false social
moralism religious rhetoric conceptions
of safety and false compassion have been
used and misused to reshaped the Western
world into a good versus evil polarity
we also explore the human need for meta
narratives the basis of morality and the
case perhaps for God in a world that
offers nihilism and totalitarianism as
Stark
Alternatives all right so I was I was
looking today through um your biography
and and your books and trying to figure
out what we could most productively
discuss and discuss and I thought that
this comment by Rachel madow in 2014
might be a good place to start she
described you in theory um as the
American left's most Fearless political
commentator and so I I have a bunch of
questions about that and the first one
might be what the hell is the American
left and and do you think that that's an
accurate portrayal of you and I I I'm
not being I'm not being smart asking
that question like it isn't obvious to
me at all how the
political lines are drawn now I'm up in
the air about it constantly
so were you the American left's most
Fearless political commentator are you
still and what do you think the left is
one thing I can tell you for certain is
that that is not something she would say
in 2023 my recollection is that was
actually a little bit earlier I think it
might have been 2009 or 10 at the start
of the Obama Administration when I
became a very vocal critic of the Obama
Administration and there weren't a lot
of people who were willing to take the
same critique that was being applied to
George Bush and Dick Cheney regarding
the war on terrorist and the assault on
civil liberties in the name of the war
on terror and apply it to Obama even
though Obama not only continued many of
those policies that he campaigned on the
vow to uproot but extended a lot of them
strengthened a lot of them and suddenly
people on the left either lost interest
in that or decided that actually it was
now justifiable given that it was now in
the hands of a benevolent leader rather
than some swaggering Evangelical like
George Bush or this kind of caricature
of capitalism like Dick Cheney their
views on the actual policy just switched
overnight and mine did not one of the
things though that I always said from
the very beginning you know I started
writing about politics in 2005 I did so
overwhelmingly as a reaction to the war
on terror I was writing not as a
journalist but more as a constitutional
lawyer that was more my interest I was
seeing things like Americans detained on
American soil and then detained for
years without charges just based on this
declaration they were enemy combatants
with no trial no hearing just based on
the say so of the executive branch I
always thought it was odd that that kind
of perspective got me labeled as
somebody on the left because from my
perspective I was defending values like
due
process uh Free Speech a free press you
know I was concerned about the erosion
of civil liberties I never really
thought of those as farle values but it
got interpreted as that because at the
moment it took found expression as being
critical of George Bush and Dick Cheney
and the perception was only people on
the left were were doing that so Rachel
mad's ideas came from I haven't changed
my views on any of those issues at all
now defense of civil liberties
opposition to censorship codes as
right-wing you know just 15 years later
and I think a lot of times people
consider me on the right even though as
I said My Views really haven't changed
but I think that's where that's where
that comes from okay so yeah in 2006 you
wrote how would a Patriot Act defending
American values from a president run a
mck and that was GW bush one of the many
presidents whove run a mar but certainly
um that was what you were writing about
okay so that's how you got identified
initially as on the left now you started
a First Amendment litigation law firm in
1996 and I I guess so I'm kind of
curious about why that was why
specifically concentrating on the First
Amendment and then I'm interested in how
that Tangled in with your Rising
suspicion and apprehension about the
Restriction of civil liberties after
9/11
when I got out of law school I worked
for about 18 months at one of the major
Wall Street law firms and knew
immediately that was not for me I knew
from the start it wasn't for me I grew
up pretty poor the lur of a big paycheck
like that was something I just wanted to
kind of get a taste of I also wanted to
demystify Wall Street you know kind of
enter it and at the end of the day those
firms are filled with very
competent crafty smart lawyers and I
knew I would learn a lot and I did but
18 months was the most I could endure
what I really wanted to do you know I
think my childhood Heroes I was sort of
steeped in the politics of the 70s and
80s this was the time when the ACLU was
defending the right of neo-nazis to
March through skoki a town of Holocaust
Survivors based obviously on the
principal these were Jewish leftist
lawyers at the ACLU defending obviously
not the Nazi party but the principal
that marginalized groups in particular
need to defend free speech I always
viewed censorship as a tool of the
establishment as a tool of authority
that was used to silence and suppress
marginalized voices dis dissidents and
the like and so the desire to use the
tools I had gained in law school in
defense of those kinds of political
values those kinds of causes was
something that was probably at the end
of the day what made me go to law school
more than anything else I certainly
didn't want to defend Goldman Sachs and
insurance companies the way I was doing
and so I was able to
the I think one of the very first
prominent cases I took was there was
this
Neo-Nazi uh leader in Illinois who was
quite smart he went to law school he
passed the bar exam and he applied for
admission to the Illinois Bar so he
could practice law and the Illinois Bar
rejected his application on the grounds
of moral uh Fitness and character which
is what they used to do to communist in
1950s and 60s they were barred from
practicing law on the grounds that they
lacked moral Fitness in a lot of Supreme
Court cases that established these
Landmark First Amendment cases said you
cannot bar people from professions
because of their political ideology
however percious that ideology might be
and so now to watch that happen from the
other side you know kind of a leftwing
or liberal attempt to Define moral
character and fitness not on whether you
steal from people or whether you assault
people but whether or not you have the
right political views was very
disturbing to me so I represented I
represented his quote unquote church and
a couple of other cases that were
designed to implant the law this the
seeds of the censorship regime and kind
of became a specialist in those kinds of
cases so well a couple of comments about
that the first is um I don't know what
the situation is in the United States
but the professional colleges in Canada
are increasingly taking a restrictive
view of Fitness to practice I mean I've
been
subject to I think 133 charges
essentially by my professional governing
board uh they dropped seven of them
recently although they didn't explain
why they dropped those seven and kept
the other six but all of the other six
are almost all of them none of which by
the way were made by clients of mine are
a consequence of my direct criticisms of
political figures and so I don't know
what the situation is in the United
States but I know that um in Canada the
the professional government governing
boards have really uh taken a what would
you say they've allowed free speech for
professionals to take a back seat and it
strikes me as extremely dangerous
because I don't see exactly what the
members of the general public are how
they're going to be served by therapists
or Physicians who are too terrified to
say what they think and I mean I've had
dozens of Physicians tell me even more
than psychologists even though my battle
is with the psychology um governing
board that
they're so terrified of their of their
Professional Organization that's the
Ontario College of Physicians that they
won't say what they think about all
sorts of things so I don't know what's
the situation like in the US on the
professional regulatory board front well
in theory it's supposed to be more
difficult in the United States to do
those sorts of things because of the
First Amendment and on some level it is
mildly more difficult but they are
really finding all kinds of ways to
circumvent that we lost that case for
example I lost that case they did not
win the the right for this Neo-Nazi
leader to practice law though it was
basically on jurisdictional and
Technical grounds so that's often times
the way they'll do it is you can see
these judges very ideologically
motivated especially in United States
nobody wants to admit they believe in
the virtues of censorship because it's
inculcated in the American Spirit that
anything that is called censorship is
kind of instinctively or are flexibly
wrong so it is a little bit that the
first amendment is a real barrier in the
United States but I regard the kinds of
Trends you're describing that happened
to you in the west more generally I know
Canada is one of the worst places for it
I used to write a lot about the hate
speech laws um I remember Mark Stein was
dragged before one of those tribunals uh
there was Ezra Levant as well and I
remember back in 20072 2008 when I was
be called being called as leftist I was
defending them and a lot of people on
both the left and the right I think were
surprised but I could see this coming
and now it's so much worse you know all
throughout Western Europe um
increasingly in North America I lived in
Brazil for a long time as well where
these censorship values are people don't
even pretend to believe in free speech
even though Brazil is part of the
democratic world and and Western Europe
is looking toward Brazil as a kind of
laboratory for how far Brazil can go
particularly the interest is in
censoring the internet but beyond that
you see people now being excluded from
the financial services industry people
can't open bank accounts or use PayPal
or any of these these these mechanisms
that in Modern Life we need to generate
an income and sustain our families and
pay our bills purely on ideological
grounds there's not even a pretense as
you said there's no patient complaint in
your case it's clearly designed to say
you're unfit to
practice uh psychology because of your
political ideology and that is to me the
most dangerous Trend in the west Beyond
any other because that not only punishes
people in unjust ways but it also breeds
a conformist Society the message is very
clear we're self-interested beings and
if we see that there's a lot of rewards
for espousing establishment pities and a
lot of punishments for questioning them
or defying them obviously a lot of
people are going to be motivated to be
as conformist as possible and we're
going to become even more conformist as
a society if that continues and that I
think is a huge loss just of the human
Spirit of the of the potential of human
life to lose the right to engage in
critical thinking and to question and
air and to challenge these are the
things for me at least that make life
valuable well also you know you you when
you were formulating your defense of of
free speech you mentioned the fact that
marginalized voices let's say minority
voices need to be heard but I would
extend that too I mean I think often the
majority voice isn't heard and is
subject to censorship and I I think
that's happening more and more often in
the west and but there's also something
else you know because people might be
leery let's say of your willingness to
defend neo-nazis at least to defend
their right to you know be as obnoxious
as they generally are but it's also the
case as far as I can tell and I really
saw this in Canada like back in the
1980s we went after this guy named Ern
zundel for hate speech and this was the
first emergence we like to Pioneer these
things in Canada by the way we pioneered
banking counseling for example thanks to
our prime minister and who basically
demolished our International reputation
as consequence of that even though
Canadians don't know it yet anyways we
went after this guy Ern dundle back in
the 1980s on hate speech and he was a
Neo-Nazi type and U you know everybody
was up in arms about this hard hat
wearing dimwit who proclaimed that the
Holocaust didn't occur and all these you
know idiot shibis of the of the radical
um Neo-Nazi right-wing and
uh and he did get he did get pillared
for what he had done I think by an early
human rights tribunal and I thought at
the time that that was extraordinarily
unfortunate because it's first of all
because I knew even then that
persecuting someone paranoid generally
is a very bad idea because you give
truth to their paranoid claims that way
and second if you take these people like
zundel and you drive them
underground then you don't know what the
hell they're up to and part of the
reason that we need a culture of free
speech is so that we can observe very
carefully what The Fringe is up to
constantly and keep an eye on their
machinations and part of the reason that
that actually turns out to be useful is
because most people who are highly
pathological can't help telling you what
they're going to do and so if you have a
space for free dialogue you can really
keep an eye on the people who would
otherwise destabilize things you drive
them underground at your par as far as
I'm concerned so yeah precisely and I
agree with that entirely that on
pragmatic grounds censorship makes no
sense from the perspective of those
censoring not only because you lose the
opportunity to hear what they're
thinking see what they're doing but so
often you turn these people into Martyrs
I mean in the United States you have the
right to wear swastika on your arm if
you so choose because the first
amendment gives you that right but if
you do that you're going to be laughed
at you're going to be regarded as a joke
you're going to be you know social scorn
works so much better than trying to
prevent people from speaking social
scorn isolates people it turns them into
an object of mockery you try and you
know the Neo-Nazi leader that I was
defending that I referenced earlier he
was a loser you know he had maybe 10
followers who were all kind of various
forms of sociopaths and psychotics just
kind of like aimless kids who were
looking for some meaning these are not
menacing people in the sense of
gathering some movement or being
strategically impressive by turning them
into Martyrs by making them seem like
they're so much more powerful than they
were because now you have to suppress
them their power and strength grows that
attracts people especially younger
people who see transgression as
something
appealing they you know I think the best
thing that ever happened to milonopoulos
for example when the left started trying
to prevent him from speaking on college
campuses that's what made Milo hear to
the right they turned him into that and
obviously now Milo has largely
disappeared in part because he but more
so because he lost a lot of his funding
from the right but what made him and so
many others like that stronger was the
attempt to silence than the attempt to
censor them and I look in other
countries where it's illegal to question
Holocaust pieties most of Western Europe
in Brazil I think in Canada as well and
those people can attract a lot more
followers than for example in the US
they can because everything is open in
the US and the idea is well at least
used to be you're free to express that
view no one's going to try and stop you
and social stigma social scorn for me is
a much stronger way of marginalizing a
nefarious ideology than having this
state or corporate
power you know invoked in order to to to
crush
it starting a business can be tough
especially knowing how to run your
online storefront thanks to Shopify it's
easier than ever Shopify is the global
Commerce platform that helps you sell at
every stage of your business from the
launch your online shop stage all the
way to the did we just hit a million
orders stage Shopify is there to help
you grow our marketing team uses Shopify
every day to sell our merchandise and we
love how easy it is to add more items
ship products and track conversions
Shopify helps you turn browsers into
buyers with the internet's best
converting checkout up to 36% better
compared to other leading Commerce
platforms no matter how big you want to
grow Shopify gives you everything you
need to take control and take your
business to the next level sign up for a
$1 per month trial period at shopify.com
jbp go to shopify.com jbp now to grow
your business no matter what stage
you're at that's shopify.com
[Music]
jbp Yeah well yeah well the other thing
too of course when you get that
extension of state power and corporate
power there's no telling whatsoever what
direction it's eventually going to turn
in I mean I um I interviewed Robert F
Kennedy Jr a couple of weeks ago for my
podcast and um the YouTube took it down
and this was really shocking to me I
must say first of all I thought it would
provoke more of a storm of outrage in
the United States because you guys were
obsessively concerned for three years
about Russian collusion in relationship
to election interference which all
turned out as far as I could tell to be
nothing but rubbish or very little more
than that but um here we have a large
corporation essentially Google actively
interfering with an ongoing presidential
campaign by a Democrat not by a
Republican and yet that seemed to go by
with very little notice and so the and
this is really quite staggering to me
even though I'm already aware that the
Democrats are nowhere near as terrified
as the radical of the radical left as
they need to be the fact that the
censorship could already proceed to the
point where it was actually a Democrat
who was being censored doesn't seem to
register with the Democrats who don't
seem to understand that in the wrong
hands and that could be at any moment
that power could be used precisely
against them and so and then one more
thing and I'll get your comments more
generally on this I've been following
the UN Twitter feed more recently even
though that's a very dismal and
disheartening thing to do and one of the
things that I see there that's really I
say would say top of the list for
appalling International globalist
utopians is the fact that they're
constantly prattling on about hate
speech and disinformation and enjoining
the people who are following them online
to be very careful about what they share
and and adopting this idea that a top
down centralized apparatus can be used
to separate let's say fact from fiction
which would be lovely if it was true but
has never been true and never will be
and so what do you think's accounting
for this how do you understand the
mounting pressure that's faced by the
this Bedrock commitment to free speech
what the hell do you think's going
on so first of all I agree with you
completely about Google's censoring of
RFK Jr in a lot of I mean this is you're
talking about somebody not only from one
of the most stored political families in
the United States and not eight
Generations removed his father was the
Attorney General of the United States
his uncle was the United States
President he spent most of his life as a
mainstream Environmental Lawyer he
endorsed Hillary Clinton in 2008 we're
not talking here about a leader of a
Neo-Nazi Church we're talking about
somebody who has spent his entire life
in the American mainstream who now is
being silenced doing an interview with
one of the most listened to podcast host
in yourself and somebody who is pulling
at 20% 20% of Democratic party voters
say they intend to vote for this person
for president and the most powerful
corporations or one of the richest and
most powerful corporations ever to exist
Google sweeps in and says this is
something that you are not permitted to
be heard and what happened was what
always is the tactic of sensors is they
always pick a test case in the beginning
that they believe is someone who is
sufficiently hated or disliked so that
everybody will acquest to the precedent
simply because their emotions for that
person are so high so the first person
to really be deplatformed in this
collusive effort by solaron Valley was
Alex Jones and Peter teal was on the
board of Facebook at the time Mark Andre
in Silicon Valley and a few other people
stood up at the time and said no matter
how much you hate Alex Jones this
President is going to work its way
slowly or maybe not even so slowly to
expand into the kinds of voices that you
probably think shouldn't be censored and
by the point that you cheer the
president in the first instance because
you allow your emotional dislike for
this person to outweigh your rational
capacities it will be too late the
president's already implemented and then
you're left to just bicker about its
application rather than the principle
itself and that's precisely what has
happened they began quickly censoring
mainstream conservative voices Deon
Nunes went to rumble in part to escape
from Google censorship and then a huge
stream of people did as well one of the
most shocking things that happened along
those lines Rand Paul questioned a
couple of
epidemiologists scientists who were
testifying before the US Senate about
the possible efficacy of ior mechon and
other alternative medication for covid
it was a senate hearing a hearing in the
United States Senate Rand Paul put it on
his YouTube channel as a excerpt of this
hearing and Google decided that was
something that ought not to be heard as
well so as for the question of why this
is happening I think it's twofold I
think one is that Millennials and now
gen Z are very much steeped in the idea
that the gravest danger is not
empowering centralized authority to
dictate what we have to think and what
we can and can't hear but
instead is the danger that comes from
ideas that they justlike and as you said
it is true a lot of times the ideas that
are being censored are ideas held by the
majority I still regard them though as
marginalized ideas because the what
matters more than the numbers is often
who's in power and the elite the people
who are the guardians of elite discourse
have views that are increasingly at odds
with the majority of the population and
those are the views that get passed on
as from on high as kind of the mandated
Orthodoxy and the views held by the
majority of people people end up being
treated as marginalized or dissent views
that get silen simply by virtue of the
fact that the majority has no power and
the elite has so much power so I think
part of it is just this generational
cultural sense that began with
Millennials has gotten worse with Gen Z
if you look at poing you see this
clearly that free speech is not really a
Paramount value anymore that there are
other values in there views that
outweigh Free Speech or the the right to
have debate be heard but I really think
the accelerant to everything was the
election of Donald Trump I think Donald
Trump's election was such a gift to the
American establishment because it
enabled them to depict Donald Trump not
as what he was which is a continuation
of the American tradition as a symptom
of the failures of the neoliberal elite
of the anger that neoliberalism has
produced all around the world they
instead depicted him as this kind of
singular unprecedented evil this never
before encountered Menace and threat to
all things decent including democratic
values and if you can convince people
that they're not just engaged in
ordinary political conflict but instead
kind of an existential overarching
historic Battle of good versus evil kind
of like giving it religious overtones
which is what our politics has has
absorbed on some level everything and
anything becomes justifiable in the name
of Prosecuting that cause and a lot of
people got convinced that the evils of
trump and his movement were so
overarching that everything had to be
thrown out the window the role of
Journalism the virtue of free speech the
idea of due process they really believe
they're they're confronting this
insurrectionary criminal fascist
movement that wants to install a white
supremacist dictatorship This Is How
They think and if you convince enough
people of that and that is what the
Elite Class really believes I don't
think they're pretending to believe that
I think they genuinely believe that
they're constantly reinforcing each
other in this sort of her behavior it's
not that far of a leap then to start
saying things like well however bad
censorship is or however bad
disinformation is or however bad
punishing people is without due process
the threat that we're combating is even
worse and therefore the me means just
the ends justify the means um You
probably saw that Sam Harris video that
went viral where he was asked about the
hunter Biden disinformation campaign
that emanated from the CIA they just
lied to the public and said that Hunter
Biden laptop was Russian disinformation
it came from the CIA corporate media
repeated it big T adopted it it was a
massive scam that they perpetrated on
the American public right before the
2020 election one of the biggest
journalistic scandals I think in in the
history of our country and when Sam
Harris was asked about that being the
kind of Cogen candid thinker he is he
essentially gave voice to the idea that
I still think the evils of
trump outweigh everything that even
lying in censorship of that kind is
Justified in the name of the cause of
stopping Trump and I think that has
become the predominant ethos of our
Elite Class and that's where the
censorship support is coming from do you
do you see it as well as uh part of the
Cascade of processes that began to make
themselves manifest after 911 and this
is partly when you got interested in the
clamp down on civil liberties and you
know one of the things that I observed
at that time which I don't think has
gone away in the least was the
transformation of airports into microf
fascist States
I thought that was a really bad idea
because by treating everyone like a
potential perpetrator which is exactly
what's happened in the airports and has
never gone away you essentially train
people to adopt that mindset because
everybody goes through airports and once
it's okay there well then why isn't it
okay everywhere I mean there's lots of
buildings in the UK now where you
basically have to undergo an airport
style search before you go into the
building and of course you have to do
that in the many of the government
buildings in Washington which also think
is an appalling idea but but so so is
there an additional thread that's
promoting this top down clamp down that
do you think is a consequence of what
occurred after 9/11 yeah I think it's a
really important observation I was in
Manhattan on 911 I lived and worked in
in New York at the time I remember as
well as anybody the vividness of that
drama it was a very traumatic event it
was frightening it was
terrible I understand that people fears
were activated in a way that made them
be willing to support things they never
would have supported otherwise I ended
up supporting things that I ordinarily
would have recoiled from like most
people in the United States
did it's just that even with the war in
teror even with an attack that
cataclysmic that just wiped out 3,000
lives in one of the most horrible ways
imaginable I think while the extremism
that emerged from that I remember nuke
ingr wrote an article in 2006 advocating
the First Amendment amended to constrict
free speech in the name of stopping
Muslim extremism or whatever he was
calling it um jihadism or Sharia
law those ideas ultimately didn't go as
far as they might have because the sense
of what American democracy means kind of
got reawakened and I think people did
start drawing lines and President Obama
ended up winning in 2008
on a pledge to close Guantanamo and
reverse the kind of more extremist
measures of the war on terror even
though he did none of that that was what
his campaign that was successful was
based on but I think what you're saying
about the airport is exactly right if
you go look at the debates in the 90s
after the Oklahoma City bombing the
bombing at the Oklahoma City Courthouse
that Timothy McVey was convicted of
perpetrating there was an attempt by the
Clinton Administration to usher in a lot
of these same extremism measures that
ended up being implemented after
911 they wanted for example the keys to
the internet a back door to all of the
encryption used by the internet and the
Republican party including people like
John Ashcraft who became George Bush's
attorney general in the wake of 911 and
the champion a lot of a lot of these
civil arties assaults led the way and
said we're not giving the federal
government the ability to read our
Communications to spy on our
conversations this is too anatha to the
American way of life and so quickly
after 911 the exact same faction in the
Republican party and American
conservatism traumatized by the attack
of 911 again for understandable reasons
but ultimately went so far in
implementing what became an
authoritarian mentality and if you go to
the airport of course all of us now are
so acclimated to it it seems normal but
the idea that everybody just so
dutifully takes off their shoes and
takes off their belt and the climate
there is you just do what you're told
you know it's kind of it seems trivial
and it's the form of it's a kind of
petty authoritarianism no one's being
imprisoned for it no one's being shot
but what it is is all it's almost more
Insidious because of that because
exactly as you say it started
conditioning people that in the name of
safety we need to unquestioningly obey
Authority kind of submit to whatever
humiliations whatever orders were told
to do and to watch the american
conservative movement that was so
steadfast in their opposition to the
idea of federal government power in the
1990s immediately turn around and start
meekly taking off their shoes at
airports and doing everything that they
were told and going through these
machines in the name of safety I think
was was quite transformative and I do
think it started training Americans
to accept the kinds of infringements on
their autonomy in the name of safety
that even just a couple of years earlier
would have been Unthinkable well you you
know what I think maybe the Critics on
the left
um I'll specify them to begin with have
always been concerned that the
fundamental threats to Liberty and let's
say equality would emerge as a
consequence of greed and the desire for
power you know and it's obviously the
case that there are valid criticisms
that can be levied against gigantic
organizations that tilt towards
regulatory capture with regards both to
their greed and their desire for
undeserved power but I think that the
left has radically underestimated the
threat that fear poses to Liberty and I
guess that's probably true of the right
as well and and what what you're laying
out is a a case where the excuse for
interfering with fundamental Liberties
is always something like a higher or is
very frequently something like um a
compassionate concern for safety and so
maybe it's the neo-nazis that we have to
be afraid of or maybe it's the Muslim
jihadists and or maybe it's the bloody
pandemic or maybe it's the looming
environmental apocalypse but there's
always some terrible catastrophe that's
looming so intently that this is finally
the time when an assault on our civil
liberties to be can be justified and my
sense of that is that the reason we made
these rights axiomatic or actually the
reason they are a atic not that we made
them that way is because there isn't any
circumstances under which there's a
better approach than to leave people the
hell alone to let them say what they
need to say and that's partly because
you know one of the things I think
conservatives do extremely badly is to
try to protect Free Speech as if it's
just another Freedom you know it's like
a honic freedom well of course you get
to say what you want to say because you
want to say it and it's you know you
enjoy it and it's annoying not to be
allowed to say it and that's not really
the issue here at all the issue is that
for most people there's no difference
between speaking and
thinking so and Mo and even for those
that small number of people who can in
fact think and that's actually quite
rare most of those people think by
speaking they just speak internally I
mean you can speak you can think in
images too but really detailed thought
really requires words and so freedom of
speech is exactly equivalent to freedom
of thought and the reason that you think
is so that you don't do stupid things um
carelessly right so there's this great
it was Alfred North Whitehead who
famously said that we think so that our
thoughts can die instead of us and if
thought is the process by which we be
renew our misapprehensions and adapt to
the World At Large and transform our
institutions if you interfere with free
speech you doom your institutions to
stagnation and and uh corruption and so
and so and so then you have to say well
if you're going to be afraid let's say
you're afraid of the coming
environmental apocalypse you might want
to be equally afraid of the measures
that people take to deal with that
apocalypse that are going to interfere
with freedom of speech because that'll
interfere with our ability to adapt and
that'll be far worse than anything we
can conjure up on the environmental
front and so I think that's part of the
reason that these rights are
self-evident right is that the whole
bloody game will grind to a halt if we
ever allow them to be interfered with
and that means ever and that basically
means your neurotic catastrophe is not
sufficient justification for your desire
to infringe on my free speech I don't
care what your bloody emergency is you
know I think this is something I've come
to conceptualize better over the years
and it's very much based in the
psychological Dynamic you're describing
George orbal has this preface I believe
it was 1984 I'm GNA I don't remember the
exact details now and originally when
the book was published where this
preface that the preface was intended
for the preface ended up not being
published it was right around the time
of World War II and it
was kind of considered heretical because
it's argument was that we think about
tyranny in these melodramatic terms that
suppression that despotism means that if
you say something against the government
armed men in black suits your black
costumes show up at your house and put
guns to your head and haul you off to
prison when in reality the much more
effective kind of despotism is not the
use of brute force in that way it's
really the transformation of the Mind
the prison ends up being something
that's constructed inside of your brain
through extremely effective propaganda
which in turn requires that that
propaganda never be questioned if you
can control a population based on how
they think you essentially eliminate the
possibility of descent so you can make
descent on paper legally
permissible but anyone who does disent
will be so instantaneously marginalized
because of the efficacy of propaganda
that it's a much more effective way of
controlling human beings because
controlling the thoughts that they have
and that in turn requires the ability to
ensure you control the flow of
information this is the thing that I
find so alarming was if you go and look
at the literature in the mid 1990s about
the Advent of the internet I think
people in Silicon Valley really had this
libertarian ethos they thought they were
actually producing a technology that was
going to be
revolutionary the the spirit behind it
was we're gonna emancipate people from
centralized State and corporate control
they're going to be able to communicate
people are going to be able to
communicate with one another without
relying on the mediation of giant
corporations which in turn are
controllable by the state it was kind of
this wild west Frontier free of control
free
regulation and when I worked with Edward
Snowden and we did the Snowden reporting
in 2013 in the archive that he provided
to me as they began to look at it
revealed that in fact the internet had
become the exact polar opposite it
become the single greatest means of
coercion and control ever invented in
human history because the ability to
control the flow of information and to
monitor what every what all of us are
doing not just what we're doing in terms
of where we're going but in terms of
what we're reading and what we're saying
in private or what we think is in
private and therefore what we're
thinking what kind of personality is
shaping us and the ideas that are
motivating us and then the ability that
that is accompanied by that knowledge to
be able to then control and manipulate
it creates this kind of closed
propaganda system that is infinitely
more powerful than say having a stacei
that is able to read everybody's email
everybody's mail in East Germany or have
their neighbors report of them in fact
during the Snowden reporting there were
ex- agents of the stacei who were saying
this enables the state to do things we
never dreamed of being able to do you
know when it was why I don't know if you
remember but there was one of the
reports was about how the NSA was spying
on Angela Merkel at the time the
chancellor of Germany she grew up in
East Germany under the stacei behind the
iing curtain and she was particularly
enraged by it by all accounts she called
Obama in a rage and said essentially
that this is what the Stasi tried to do
and technologically were kind of impeded
from doing there were workarounds to it
if you were a dissident in East Germany
there were dissidents in in in in behind
the Iron Curtain in in in communist uh
Soviet communism whereas this kind of
makes it impossible
and increasingly what it's relied on is
as I was saying earlier I think these
Elites who believe that Trump is the
singular evil that everything is
Justified in the name of stopping him I
say they genuinely believe it because
even people who are reasonably
intelligent who have been educated all
of that are very prone to propaganda
propaganda is a weapon that has been
developed over many decades that is
designed to cater specifically to what
our needs are psychologically creates a
reward system a punishment system it's
very powerful I think all of us probably
have the experience of having been
propagandized in one way or the other
where we come to realize we believe
something that we've never really
critically assessed that we've kind of
just absorbed in the ethos I know I've
had that experience many times before
and I think that is really what the
censorship regime is about it's not
necessarily to
punish dissident although that is part
of it it's really to ensure that people
are only getting exposed osed to a flow
of information that serves the interest
of a small Elite so that you don't have
to kill and punish dissidents you just
eliminate dissent and the few people who
are for whatever reason kind of
resisting it end up just so marginalized
that it doesn't matter anyway and on
some level it's almost better to have
them because it casts the illusion that
there's still some lingering
Freedom the October 15th tax deadline
has just passed I know many of you might
be dreading the stress of filing your
taxes filing your taxes can be a long
excruciating process but if you fail to
file you'll start to pile penalties on
top of your tax debt that's why you need
to check out tax Network USA the team at
tax Network USA has a track record of
success they've reduced tax debts for
numerous clients totaling over $1
billion whether you're looking at a
$10,000 or $1 million tax debt they can
help you with the settlement it doesn't
matter if you haven't filed in one year
5 years or even a Whole Decade tax
Network USA is equipped to secure the
best settlement for you the expert
attorneys and tax professionals at tax
Network USA can help resolve all tax
cases no matter how they started don't
let tax debt control your life any
longer take the first step toward
resolving your tax issues by visiting
tax Network
usa.com Peterson that's tax Network
usa.com Peterson
today now you you made reference in our
conversation here to the religious
overtones let's say that accompanied um
claims that Trump for example was you
know the sum of all evil and going to
instantiate a white supremacist
totalitarian state that would rule to
the end of time and you wrote a book in
2007 a tragic Legacy how a good versus
evil mentality destroyed the bush
presidency so I want to delve into that
for a minute and share with you some
thoughts I've been developing and and
you tell me what you think about them
okay okay I'm still working this out so
you know there's a gospel phrase that
you're to Render unto Caesar what is
Caesar and unto God what is God's and
the idea there that is a one of the
ideas there is that there are separate
conceptual domains for different kinds
of
concerns and that the and so the way I
read that at least in part I I'll tell
you a backstory you know now and then
when I was working as a clinician I
would have clients tell me things that
were truly terrible like
multi-generational murderous terrible
you know uh long family histories of
hidden sexual uh um abuse uh a lies so
deep that you can hardly imagine them
way out on the pale Beyond The Pale
right and I for me that was the land of
Good and Evil and one of the things that
would happen if I was discussing things
that were deeply affecting enough to
give the people who had had the experien
this post-traumatic stress disorder is
that the con the tenor of the
conversation and the language itself
would almost inevitably become religious
and it helped me understand that part of
what religious language does is enable
us to conduct a dialogue about about
what's truly malevolent right beyond the
political and so and that made me wonder
you know if if the religious collapses
so that you can no long longer Render
unto God what is Gods let's say because
that entire belief system disappears
then maybe the maybe everything that
should be attributed to God so to speak
is now played out in the political realm
is that you get a collapse of the
religious into the political and the
reason that that's a catastrophe is
because then you can no longer conduct
the political as political it
degenerates into a war of good against
evil and but but a very also a very I
would say unsophisticated War so I'll
I'll just close with this and then you
can comment if you would so one of the
things that happens as the
judeo-christian Corpus of of what would
you say of conceptualization of good and
evil as it
develops the notion is is that spiritual
battle between good and evil is
something that should be conducted on an
individual basis and within so that if
you want to constrain evil you don't
search for it in the external world
because that can make you a persecutor
and an accuser you attempt to bind its
manifestation in the confines of your
own life and that's partly what takes it
out of the political realm and so if you
don't do that and it collapses into the
political then you start looking for
demonic enemies everywhere to account
for malevolence and the problem with
that is that it turns you into a
sensorial self-righteous persecutor now
you wrote a whole book about you know
the the the the good versus evil
mentality destroying the bush presidency
and you talked about the religious
overtones that are associated for
example with with justification of
censorship on the oh my God this is
finally the apocalyptic threat basis
like I'm curious about what you think of
the conceptual scheme that I just laid
forward that we need a language for
dealing with good and evil per se and a
separate political language and if we
don't keep those separate well one
collapses into the other it doesn't
disappear yeah you know it's interesting
I um as I listen to that you know I mean
I grew up uh without a lot of religion
like many people these days in the west
do um my grandparents were steeped in
Judaism but not
very you know ex not it wasn't very
extreme it was more cultural I would say
than religious my parents less so and
then by the time uh we got to my brother
and myself it was almost
non-existent and you know like in early
adulthood I kind of considered that a
source of Pride like so many people do
it's a pmark of sophistication and
modernity that you've discarded these
archaic conceptions and we're now you
know Advanced and all of that and
obviously technologically we are more
advanced than the generations that came
before us but I think a lot of times
with that comes a certain huis that
because we're more technologically
advanced it means we're more advanced in
every way and one of the things that I
have worked hard is to lose that hubris
and I think you know for me when I see
people who believe in censorship believe
in the idea that certain views are so
wrong they that it ought to be
prohibited to me what's driving that
more than anything is hubris because the
whole history of humanity is error what
is considered proven truth in one
generation is then regarded as Grievous
error the next that's true across every
field of discipline and morality and
ethics and the idea that somehow we've
escaped from that and we are now no
longer prone to error that we have
apprehended truth that is just so
absolute that no one should be even
allowed to question it it's just never
an Impulse I ever have no M and I
believe in a lot of things passionately
very strongly it's not like I walk
around doubting everything I just never
would find the level of arrogance
to believe that my convictions even the
ones I hold most strongly are so
self-evidently and permanently true that
any questioning of them should be
prohibited barred and I think hubris is
at the root of that I think the same is
true with the idea of religion there is
a reason I think that human beings
across Millennia and across culture and
across every other conceivable line have
sought out religion I believe it's
something we need it's intrinsic to us
whether you want to call it religious or
spiritual however you describe it it's
something that is a part of us and that
we're going to seek out one way or the
other because it I believe is a human
need it's something I've started looking
for myself as I get older now that I
have kids it's something that has become
a bigger part of my life and if you
don't have that in the form that people
have traditionally had it with the
established religions of Judaism or
Christianity or Islam or Hind ISM or any
of even smaller you know more more
modern religions like Mormonism I think
people are going to find a way to to to
express that and these days they use
Politics as their vehicle for it and
that is what's so dangerous is exactly
what you're describing because the
fanaticism and the faith and the
righteousness that comes from that
religious and spiritual expression can
be extremely dangerous if imported into
politics which isn't about as you say
for me this religious and spiritual
exploration is about what we do
internally you know how we understand
ourselves and our relationship to the
universe and whether there's something
bigger than ourselves and our purpose
it's a very
introspective and personal Endeavor
whereas politics is about wielding power
in a way that controls and influences
the lives of other people and if you
import this religious component in to it
and cease having empathy for other
people's experiences and ideas and just
are always convinced that whoever is on
the other side of your tribe is
intrinsically evil and you're
intrinsically good again it's going to
devolve into that ends justifi the means
mentality and in politics that is
historically an extremely dangerous way
of navigating the world so do you think
so I've been talking to Douglas Murray
about this um topic quite extensively I
would say over a number of years and
Douglas was raised in a more religious
family than you were a Christian family
um and his parents were Avid church
attenders but he dispensed with all of
that and toyed for a while even with u
explicit Allegiance with the you know
with the Hitchens Dawkins Harris um
crowd um dennet as well the Four
Horsemen of the Apocalypse
but Douglas has become more convinced
that
the humanist Endeavor cannot maintain
its ethos without it being embedded in
an underlying let's say narrative
metaphysics which is for all intents and
purposes a religious framework and the
religious framework also you know it it
it always borders on the Transcendent
and the unknowable I suppose that's a
good way of thinking about it so Carl
Jung thought for example that the
psychoanalyst he sort of believed that
our rationality was necessary
necessarily bounded by the domain of the
dream right if you think about how we
adapt to the world we have our explicit
ways of representing the world that can
be encapsulated semantically and those
would be our statable
propositions but that's never complete
right and so outside of that is
everything we don't know and from the
perspective of Yung and and the
psychoanalysts who adopted his Viewpoint
the dream was the mediator between what
we knew explicitly and what we did not
yet know it was a buffer zone and the
the Transcendent characters of the
Dreamscape were essentially deities and
religious figures and that strikes me as
correct I think that's in keeping with
how we what we Now understand about how
the brain functions and about how we
process information when we first come
across it um as analist for example but
it does beg the question you know
Douglas has told me pretty
straightforwardly that he thinks that
any ethical system that isn't grounded
in a Transcendent metaphysics whatever
that means is going to degenerate into a
propagandistic
ideology and well I'm I'm wondering like
are those thoughts that you said that
you've been seeking more now at this
stage in your life than you had been
previously do those sorts of Reflections
ring true to you or do you do you see a
flaw in that life kind of
reasoning yeah so this this is an idea I
have grappled with a lot I think a lot
of people who passed through a kind
of uh
atheistic passage in life have had to
Grapple with it as well I remember being
something even going back to studying
philosophy and undergraduate school was
always a question which is if you
believe there's nothing to life but our
material existence that is finite that
we're born and then we die and that's
the end of everything there's no greater
power the challenge is how do you have
any kind of an Ethics or a morals that
make any sense if all there is is
materiality it seems like you could
justify being driven by nothing other
than material gain and no basis for any
kind of ethical or moral constraint
since that's what religion has typically
offered that there's a God that there's
a morality and an Ethics that they
passed down and if you remove that what
is the basis for this ethical for this
morality and I do think I even remember
when I was so sure of myself my early
20s being finding that a uncomfortable
and difficult question because it is not
an easy one to answer and I think as
I've gotten older I've also started
viewing spirituality and religion and I
kind of use that
interchangeably as necessary for a
complete human existence and I know that
has become the foundation from my own
ethics from my own moral ity the sense
of empathy and compassion that you have
for other people my view that that
becomes a necessity to honor that to be
guided by it and I do really wonder how
it's possible if you live your entire
life without that to avoid turning to
nihilism and I think a lot of people do
turn to nihilism when Western Society
tells them there is nothing spiritual or
religious that's valid and we see it in
all the mental health indexes as you
know better than anyone in terms of the
data you studied and have talked a lot
about just the kind of lack of purpose
and higher meaning that people are left
with in their lives when you strip away
everything other than material existence
yeah well the the materialist atheist
types I suppose would object and and I I
try to make the argument as powerful as
possible
that just because you come up with a
hypothetical practical necessity for a
certain kind of belief let's even call
it a certain kind of delusion or
Illusion
right um that that doesn't justify the
hypothesis of something Supernatural or
Transcendent but I would respond to that
perhaps as follows the first is is that
we have some relationship with the
whole and because we're a part of a
larger whole and we don't know what that
relationship is but there has to be some
relationship and I suppose your
relationship with that larger hole you
know existence as such could be positive
or negative and it's conceivable at
least that that's a decision of Faith
you know whether you're going to act in
accordance with the principle that being
itself is essentially good and to try to
understand from that what ethical
obligations that lays on you but I've
also been going through the biblical
Corpus trying to understand in some ways
what it means to believe in a
Transcendent relationship and so I've
been writing about the story of Abraham
so let me just tell you what I've found
in that and you tell me what you think
about that
so what God is in the story of Abraham
is conceptualized as something like the
voice within that calls you to
Adventure so it it it's a proposition
right that there is a an animating
spirit that that's a good way of
thinking about it that can unite people
psychologically and
socially and that that uniting spirit
that uniting animating Spirit has a
canonical and immutable nature and one
of the manifestations of that nature is
the Call to Adventure and so Abraham is
an old man by the time he leaves his
father's tent but he hears a voice
within beckon to him that says you
should leave comfort and security and
venture out into the world
now it seems to me that we do have a
voice like that that speaks within us so
to speak and it's not exactly our voice
personally right because it speaks to
everyone so it can't be something that's
specifically subjective and I think that
you either listen to that voice say and
venture out into the world in adventure
or you don't listen to it and either of
those choices is a choice of
faith and so that's a little different
than believing in a so-called like what
would you say a a hypothetical
Supernatural reality right it's more
like the decision to orient yourself
according to a certain animating
principle so in the story of Moses I'll
just develop it with one more story and
then leave it um The Same Spirit that
calls to
Abraham to embark on the adventure of
his life is the spirit that calls to
Moses to free his enslaved people from
tyranny and the hypothesis the biblical
hypothesis is those are manifestations
of the same Central animating Spirit
right that's yahwah in the Old Testament
so the hypothesis there is that there's
a Transcendent spirit that animates
humanity and one of its manifestations
is the Call to Adventure and another one
of its manifestations is the call to
resist tyranny and to move out of what
the domain of slavish habits and so it
seems to me that you either believe in
those propositions or you don't but that
either choice is a choice of Faith right
because you could say well tyranny is
acceptable and so is slavery that's a
decision of Faith or you could say that
tyranny is not acceptable and neither is
slavery and that's a decision of faith
and I don't see any non-faith
alternative and the same thing applies
on the adventure front so I don't know
what you think about that but maybe you
could make some comments and tell me you
know how that strikes you it's it is of
course the the challenge of this
conversation and you're absolutely right
the fact that there are positive
outcomes from believing something in
other words oh if you believe in
religion it's a lot easier to have a
foundation for a moral code doesn't make
that belief true there may be positive
benefits from it and it could be
completely false that of course is
logically true we're all with all these
questions though we're dealing with a
lack of dispositive proof even concrete
evidence empirical evidence of the kind
that we normally want when we're
deciding whether to affirm a belief but
that's true from all sides of this this
perspective if you want to believe
there's some Supernatural force greater
than yourself some force of the universe
whether it's a God or some other similar
concept of course you cannot provide
mathematical proof or anything close to
that but that's the same for arguing
it's negation you cannot prove the
absence of it either and I this gets
back to what I was saying earlier about
I think sometimes because we are
technologically advanced we Mis we
mistake that for being advanced in other
ways that all of our wisdom is
necessarily Superior to those who came
before us and at the end of the analysis
I do feel a certain kind of humility
when I look at the fact that human
beings for Millennia a cross cultural
lines across religious lines have been
seeking the same sort of fulfillment the
same sort of purpose now maybe that's
just a psychological desire to believe
that life can't just be the 70 or 80 or
90 years when we're on the earth and
there's no purpose to it and we all kind
of deceive ourselves into believing
otherwise but my perceptions about all
of this ultimately is can only be based
in my own personal experience and and
the ability to connect with things that
do seem very clear to me to be a
spiritual presence a part of a whole a
Transcendent Force are things that just
feel very real to me didn't previously
because I can't prove them rationally
and I think in the gospel and the
stories you're referencing and there are
a lot of others one sees a similar
spirit in other religions as well you
know obviously people who believe in one
religion believe it's the True Religion
and the rest of the religions are by
definition false when I look at these
religious doctrine that have been around
for so long I see a lot more similarity
than I do differences or are obviously
dogmatic and doctrinal differences that
are important I think it's all about the
same human craving and the fact that we
all want this and need this and I think
so many people come to feel it I think
it takes a lot of arrogance just dismiss
that all the way as the byproduct of
Illusion or Superstition or deceit what
change go ahead what changed for you
like why did you start why did this why
did this turn of attitude make itself
known to you what what happened in your
life I had a list of things when I was
younger I that I thought if I acquired
them would make me
happy and it was my conception of What
happiness is very much derived from
Modern Western
culture tells you if you're successful
in your career if you become financially
prosperous if your work becomes well
known these kinds of things are the
things that are going to ultimately be
fulfilling and the more I chased them
and the more I acquired them in a lot of
ways the less happy I
became
and
my husband I was married for 20 years my
husband died uh in May this year so just
a couple of months ago
um was somebody who you know tried very
hard to get me to be open to other ways
of looking at the world including
starting a family you know adopting
children from an orphanage that would
not have been adopted had we not done so
and we did and that opened my eyes to
the fact that there's more to life than
I had previously thought I just became a
lot more humble once you once you see
that the way that you've been looking at
the world is incomplete or even on the
wrong path you start believing that
maybe there's things you've written off
before that are things you ought to go
back and reconsider and then just being
more open to things like meditation and
spirituality um reading texts that are
derivative of Hinduism and um and then
even you know one time I think maybe 15
years ago I did just start down sit down
and read the gospel from start to finish
because it's something that you hear a
lot about that you form opinions about
and then you go and actually read it as
you've obviously been doing and have
done it is something that makes
you just connect to it in a different
way than if you're just looking at in
that snide dismissive way where a lot of
us are taught to view it and then once I
started traversing the spiritual path
and then seeing that real happiness and
fulfillment lies not in material gain or
fame or any of those things I mean there
are fulfilling things to those things
but you cannot be a complete person I
don't think without family and then the
spiritual component and trying to
understand where you fit into this
broader picture at least for me that was
the thing that finally enabled me to be
happy to be a complete person and it
just started forcing me to reevaluate
how I understood our place in the world
and our purpose in it right okay so so
we've proposed
that without
something some
superordinate orienting structure let's
say that the battle between good and
evil collapses into the political and
that that poses the danger of the rise
of something approximating
totalitarianism often justified by
demonizing your enemies let's say and
also as a consequence of willingness to
use fear in the face of the looming
apocalypse and you've also made the case
that there's a certain hubristic pride
in the censorship movement that is a
kind of intellectual Pride that is
predicated on the assumption that what I
know now is everything that's worth
knowing and that what other people think
can be easily dispensed with and then
the third thing we pointed to pointing
to the necessity of a metaphysics let's
say on the personal front in your
experience was has been that you pursued
some of the things that were more
materialistic and quite successfully
that you you were led to believe or did
believe would produce a sense of
continual fulfillment but what you found
in your life was that some more
traditional Ventures like starting a
family and some striving for something
Transcendent made itself known as
increasingly necessary as you got older
is that a fair summary of Where we've
gone so far
absolutely all right well let's let's
leave that for the time being I want to
return back to your line of of of of
books in 2008 you published a book
called Great American Hypocrites
toppling the big myths of Republican
politics so you're going after the
Republicans again you went after the
bush types for a good while and so what
did you conclude when you were assessing
the Republican political front and why
did you phrase it in terms of hypocrisy
and do you think there was more
hypocrisy for example on the Republican
side than there was on the Democrat side
if I'm being completely honest and why
wouldn't I be that book is not a book
that brings me a lot of Pride I had I
had actually I had just started um
writing about politics in 2000 late 2005
2006 and I wrote These first two books
that I actually am proud of I came from
kind of a good place and I was a
constitution lawyer I moved to Brazil I
got married uh to my husband and we had
to live in Brazil we chose to live in
Brazil and I couldn't practice a laot
anymore and I need a way to kind of make
a living out of Journalism and at the
time writing books was the way I was
doing it there was a lot of pressure for
me so this
book there are some good ideas in this
book but the book itself the way it's
framed the title Great American
Hypocrites topping topping the big
Republican Party politics is very Bal
it's kind of tra it's a way more
partisan Trea than anything I've written
before or written since but the idea was
that the there's a kind of
iconography in Republican Party politics
I remember when I was growing up my
father was mostly
conservative um but not fanatically
political and he used to kind of rever
this certain sort of male AR type that I
think he felt was lacking in his life
like John Wayne Ronald Reagan Oliver
North um and I think Republican Party
politics has relied in a lot of ways on
these Arch types often from people
who don't really exude those virtues in
their actual life people who purport to
be very Pious and yet in their private
life seems not to follow that very well
people who seek courage and strength by
sending other people to war but never
have been near a Frontline near a front
line themselves they like to send other
people to it and then kind of inflate
their chest and feel powerful so there
were some seeds of some substantive
ideas in the book but the editor just
wanted a kind of they were always
looking for the lefts and culture and I
think the way that book got framed the
way they kind of forced me into this you
know attack the Republican party was
more a byproduct of that so I don't
think I've ever gone back and read that
book once it was done because it was
just kind of a a you know sort of Labor
of necessity rather than a labor of love
so well so so what do you think I mean
it's it your your comments on your book
are interesting and revealing I suppose
what is it that you are not
particularly proud of in your words in
relationship to that work I mean there's
room on the journalistic front for
criticism of political opportunists for
example or of entire parties for that
matter and in some ways in many ways you
could regard that as the appropriate
purview of a critical journalist so what
do you think that what do you think was
wrong in your approach you pointed maybe
to uh what a kind of instrumental
necessity and and what do you think it
was that clouded your vision let's say
so that you're not as happy with that
book as you might be about some of the
other ones that you've produced I think
it's just the partisan nature of it I
think the critiques I made are by no
means confined to the Republican party
but book publishing especially in
politics kind of the crudest way of
trying to make a book successful from a
commercial perspective is to feed a
certain political camp
with material that will validate their
presuppositions will tell them that
they're on the right side so like I said
I do think the critiques were valid you
know hypocrisy of politicians also
though is a kind of loow hanging fruit I
think it didn't require a lot of brain
power to make that critique I don't
think it was particularly insightful I
do think there were some parts as I said
that were you know the seeds of some
interesting psychological it was a very
psychological book about how political
leaders try and create their imagery in
a way that's appealing is is that to
confine it to a critique of the
Republican party I think was just a
little bit cheap and like I said
probably the byproduct of commercial
pressures rather than intellectual
autonomy that's all I it's you know frul
about to some degree you felt like you
had subverted your what higher order
critical capacity to Like Instrumental
necessity let's leave that then let's go
to the next one with liberty and justice
for some is this a book you're more
pleased with this was 2011 how the law
is used to destroy equality and protect
the powerful okay so now you've returned
to something more like a um what would
you say an orientation that you're that
you're well that that you feel allowed
you to remain firmly grounded while you
were writing this and you're looking
back on this book with with more
pleasure than on the previous book right
this book was a more systemic critique
it was not in any way partisan it I
think the origin of it was that you know
the first book that I wrote in 2006 you
mentioned how it a Patriot Act was a
legalistic critique of what I thought
were some law violating policies enacted
by the bush and Cheney Administration
often without Congressional approval
sometimes in violation of congressional
statute I thought it was the kind of
criminality that would typically be
prosecuted and when President Obama was
inaugurated one of the first things he
did was announce this kind of amnesty
for any highle political officials or
anyone at the CIA who had broken the law
as part of the war on terror and invoke
what has now become this
traditional Elite serving framework that
Prosecuting people for crimes if they're
from a prior Administration or a prior
government is too destabilizing we have
to look forward not backward was the
phrase that he used it originated in
jeral Ford's pardon of Richard Nixon and
what bothered me about it there was no
prosecutions of anyone on Wall Street
from the 2008 financial crisis even
though lots of Scholars have written
about why many prosecutions would have
been viable that was one of the most
cataclysmic events of our lifetime
certainly the 2008 financial crisis the
effects linger to this very day in terms
of people's economic stability all over
the world a lot of it was based on
fraudulent practices and you contrast
that with the fact the United States is
the most uh Pro jail country on the
planet we have 5% of the world's
population and yet 20 25% of prisoners
on the planet Are An American prison we
imprison people for longer periods of
time for crimes that ordinarily would
not be punished this gargant prison
state that definitely disproportionately
falls on people who are at the lower end
of the
socioeconomic perspective and so it was
kind of contrasting this idea that for
Elites there's a kind of legal immunity
and for poor people in the United States
who can't afford legal council who rely
on incredibly overworked uh public
defenders and the like people go to
prison for very long periods of time
including for nonviolent crimes that
have made the United States the world's
biggest Jailer and that contrast has
been disturbing to me and the book was
largely about that right so that's a it
sounds like a more classic left-wing
take I would say I'm still trying to
position you politically to some degree
I mean not that I have a particular
reason for doing so but I'm I it's one
of the questions we've left left
unanswered is how you conceptualize your
political St mean that that opposition
to law being formulated in a manner that
preferentially benefits the wealthy
because you use socioeconomic status as
the prime marker I mean that's a
continual
reasonable plaint from people on the
left right is that the P structures of
power get tilted in the service of those
who have the power and you know that's
something that everyone should always be
on a lookout for because just well if
for no other reason than just because
you have power right now doesn't mean
that you're going to have it you know in
a year so we should all watch out on
that front so what can you can you walk
through your your conclusions in that
book like what what did you see as the
causes you talked a little bit about the
proclivity of one Administration to
forgive the sins of the previous you
talked about the free past that was
given to people who were involved in the
2008 financial Scandal are there
other what would you say are there other
threats to the Integrity of the law that
you see as particularly Germaine in the
US at the moment I mean I think I think
that book grew out of a concern that has
intensified in the last decade that the
West in general is now a society that
has a larger breach than ever before
between elites on the one hand and the
vast majority of people on the other you
referenced earlier for example the fact
that many of the views that are now
considered taboo or many of the beliefs
that are considered unworthy of being
aired are happened to be beliefs that
majorities of people uh subscribe to and
those prohibitions are being imposed by
class that is so wildly at odds with the
vast majority of people over whom
they're essentially ruling which is a
very
destabilizing uh framework for a society
to have if you look for example a
polling data about crime and you listen
to Black or Latino elites on television
or people with newspaper columns you
would think that the vast majority of
non-white people want the police
defunded want the police deconstructed
hate the police don't want the police in
their neighborhoods of course if you
look at polling data you find the exact
opposite is true black people Latinos
people any of any race who live in poor
communities either want the same amount
of police or more police in their
neighborhood there's this constant
breach obviously with gender ideology
there's that breach with a lot of
culture War issues with the question of
endless Warfare with the question of
gigantic corporations between the views
of the elite class and the views of the
vast majority people over whom they're
ruling and historically if you are to if
you were to look at how that breach has
been addressed there's essentially two
ways you can you can go about trying to
to resolve that namely you know I think
the election of Donald Trump the
election of Jer bolsonaro in Brazil
brexit the rides of a lot of these kind
of populist parties are very much about
the fact that huge numbers of people
feel I think justifiably and validly
that Elite ideology doesn't care about
them at all is willing to squeeze SE
every opportunity out of their life in
order to benefit a small minority of
people and when you have this kind of
mass populist anger traditionally the
elites can try and appease it by kind of
throwing some more crumbs to people just
to keep them just satiated enough that
they're not going to go out into the
street and cause political turmoil and
protest and the like or the society can
say you know what let them Riot we'll
just militarize to the teeth we'll give
ourselves every kind of power and every
kind of
authoritarian uh weapon that we need so
that even if they want to Riot they'll
be crushed immediately I think the West
is choosing that latter path of no
longer trying to appease people no
longer trying to give them enough to
keep them at a
decent uh quality of life or the
perception that the system is
essentially fair and instead is param
militarizing is becoming more
authoritarianism I think that's what a
lot of the trends in the west are about
and that book was really a way of saying
that even the law the kind of Lynch pin
of what is supposed to ultimately
guarantee that even though we were
supposed to have material differences
the founders were capitalists they
expected and anticipated that there
would be differences in material wealth
that the law would ultimately be the
guarantor of the fairness of that
inequality that people would accept its
validity or its legitimacy because we
were all operating by the same set of
rules and increasingly the law has
become something that's the exact
opposite just yet another weapon for
Elites to use against uh people who are
powerless to keep them in line to keep
them kind of uh neutered and Toothless
and that's really the this the the the
ethos out of which that book grew and
the fact that Elites have given
themselves a kind of broadscale immunity
that our prisons and our courtrooms or
criminal courtrooms aren't for wealthy
people aren't for powerful people with
some exceptions but are overwhelmingly
for poor people even ones who are
addicted drugs committing nonviolent
crimes that was the critique of of that
book so let's segue from that into your
2014 book that's no place to hide Edward
Snowden the NSA and the US surveillance
State and so well that obviously
developed some of the themes that you
were just discussing which is the
proclivity of the elite and I have some
questions about who you think the elite
are exactly because that's an
interesting issue um tell me what you
discovered and what you were attempting
to accomplish with no place to hide that
basically told the story of the work I
did with Edward Snowden he had contacted
me anonymously at the end of
2012 saying he had access to a huge
Trove of top secret documents that
demonstrated that the US government its
allies were engaged in a kind of
ubiquitous surveillance that would shock
people even such as myself who had been
writing about that and had long
suspected that was the case uh the kind
of final straw for him was when he heard
James Clapper President Obama's senior
National Security official who was the
director of National Intelligence
testified before the senate in early
2013 he was asked by Senator Ron widen
of Oregon does the NSA collect dossier
on millions and millions of Americans
and James Clapper lied and said no sir
it does not not wittingly and Snowden
had in his hands the evidence because he
had worked for for and then the NSA is a
contractor the evidence proving that
what Clapper denied the NSA was doing
was in fact exactly what the NSA was
doing in fact to an extent that nobody
would have suspected the motto of the
NSA was collect it all they really
wanted to and were well on their way to
converting the internet into a tool of
ubiquitous surveillance that everything
done on the internet set on the Internet
by Ordinary People American citizens
suspected of no wrongdoing these were
suspicionless this was suspicionless
surveillance
uh was being collected and stored with
the potential when they wanted to
analyze and utilize this information
incredibly comprehensive pictures of Our
Lives based on who we were speaking to
what we were reading um the content of
our communication and so I went to Hong
Kong met was Snowden along with the
filmmaker War pess who filmed it that
became the film that became the film
that won the Oscar in 2015 for best
documentary citizen 4 very kind of high
drama but I think journalistically
consequential and to me that's what that
those materials revealed was just how
unaccountable the US Security State had
become that this was a part of our
government that was created to operate
in complete secrecy but it was always
supposed to be attached to some form of
democratic accountability there were
lots of abuses discovered in the mid 70s
there were supposedly reforms done and
yet we have a part of our government
that is now huger than ever more
powerful than ever operat so much in the
dark that I was getting contacted when
we were doing this reporting by members
of Congress who are on the intelligence
Committee in the US in Great Britain in
Australia and Canada saying I had no
idea any of this was taking place and it
was kind of a radicalizing moment for me
because it wasn't for me a book or an
episode in my life that was
about surveillance and privacy although
of course it was about that as much as
it was about democracy the fact that
these incredible consequential choices
had been undertaken about how the
government was going to utilize the
internet convert it into a system of
mass indiscriminate ubiquitous
surveillance with no Democratic
accountability of any kind no
transparency of any kind and it made me
realize that there really is this kind
of part of the government as Dwight
Eisenhower tried to warn us about in
1961 before Vietnam before the war on
terror that essentially is the real
government is the government that is
immune to
elections that does what it wants with
very little
constraints and I find it very very
alarming very
menacing and well and how do you feel
about that now I mean do do you think
we're farther down the rabbit hole than
we were when you wrote that book I mean
it's 9 years later and our technological
reach has expanded tremendously I mean
when you're looking at the state of
Freedom let's say in the west
today what are your what are your
observations on that front
I actually think it's worse um which
might be paradoxical because there were
some benefits from this reporting it
made people aware for the first time of
not only the extent to which the US
government and its allies are spying on
again not Al-Qaeda cells or uh Isis
cells which everybody would support but
entire Western population including
American citizens and that awareness
made it possible to take precautions
against it so people use encryption more
than they did before big tech companies
like Facebook and Google were pressured
to demonstrate they were protecting the
safe the privacy of their users by also
using encryption so it did construct
some barriers to what the government had
been doing but one of the interesting
thing was at the time we did the Snowden
reporting you're talking
2013 the fear that had once been
inspired by the mention of al-Qaeda had
really worn off this is now 12 years
after the 911 attack there had been no
mass casualty terrorist attacks in the
United States anywhere near 911 even the
ones that had happened quickly in Madrid
and in London and the years following
those kind hadn't happened and so there
was a sense that okay the war in Terror
has gone way too far this is kind of an
extremism that we should not tolerate
and then very quickly Isis emerged in
2014 and 2015 Isis was presented as the
threat worse than Al-Qaeda and then 2016
in the 2016 election suddenly
Russia got kind of
revitalized as the existential threat
that America and the West faces brexit
was blamed on Russia Trump's election
was blamed on Russia and it reinstalled
this instilled this kind of sense that
no we actually like the CIA we like the
US Security State we believe it needs to
kind of operate Without Limits because
the enemies we're facing are so great
that was going back to what we talked
earlier about how people had been
convinced to think about Trump they also
began thinking of that about Vladimir
Putin Russia even though American
presidents from Clinton to Bush to Obama
to Trump had talked about Putin as this
kind of rational figure with whom they
could do business suddenly got converted
into this the new
Hitler and this ability of the US
Security State and its allies in the
media to always give people this new
frightening enemy that convinces them
that they need to acquas to
authoritarian Powers is almost
impressive and the way in which American
liberals in particular the Democratic
party started feeding on this hatred for
Russia and this belief that Vladimir
Putin was this kind of hitler-like
figure along with Donald Trump pushed
them into the arms of these agencies
because they perceive correctly that
these agencies were trying to sabotage
the Trump presidency this is where
Russia gate came from it was a CIA
concoction they fed it every day to the
New York Times And The Washington Post
which gave themselves pit serves for it
it revitalized these fears and and I
think these agencies and not I don't
just think if you look at polling data
you'll see they are held in higher
regard than any time since the peak of
the Cold War particularly by adherence
of the democratic party I think one of
the best things that Donald Trump did
was Usher in a kind of
skepticism about these agencies that had
never previously gotten a foothold in
mainstream Republican Party politics
before but for exactly that reason the
establishment wing of politics and media
and the ocratic party views this agen
these agencies as more benevolent than
ever and that is a a really alarming
mindset you
tweeted and this might be relevant well
it's relevant to what you just said but
it might also be relevant to maybe what
we'll close this discussion with which
is how do you characterize this Elite
let's say that things are being done in
service of so you tweeted out the
cultural left meaning the part of the
left focused on cultural issues rather
than imperialism or
corporatism has become increasingly
censorious moralizing controlling
repressive petulant joyless self-
victimizing trivial and Status Quo
perpetuating now I've had the
opportunity to ask 20 or
30 congressmen and Senators on the
Democrat side when they think the left
goes too far and I asked Robert F
Kennedy that actually in our interview
and that was the one question he
declined to answer saying that he wanted
to put forward a vision of unity
especially on the Democrat side rather
than disunity you know and fair enough
but I've been struck by the fact that
the Democrats in particular can't see
the danger of their radical Fringe and
seem utterly unwilling or unable to
dissociate them from
what I see as behind the mean by behind
the
scenes manipulators with an almost
Psychopathic bent um that's the
increasingly censorious moralizing
controlling repressive petulant crowd
you talked a fair bit about the elites
today you know and the the elite um from
the leftist perspective is historically
being those who are wealthy or who
occupy higher positions on the
socioeconomic ladder but it isn't
exactly obvious that the elite on the
left are characterized by those
descriptors precisely mean when you're
trying to
conceptualize who constitutes the
censorious tyrants or this increasingly
repressive
Force what what do you conclude
what where exactly is the are the
enemies of Freedom so to speak the
enemies of free speech at least let's
say where do you think they're primarily
located and and does this is there a new
conceptualization necessary that makes a
mockery of the old political
divisions yeah you know this term Elite
you're absolutely right to interrogate
this it is it is obviously a somewhat
ambiguous term and that ambiguity
sometimes allow allows a kind of
Reckless use of it you just throw that
word around you're not really sure
exactly to whom you're referring it
almost has this kind of like uh
melodramatic lure to it like oh we're
always against the elites everybody we
just like is the elite and so I think it
is important to ask that question and
have at least a concrete sense of who
you're talking about I think it maybe
even
differs based on what kind of policy
debate you're having so maybe the elite
is a little bit different when you're
talking about Economic Policy where I
think
probably large corporate power car most
about economic policy and uses their
weight and throws their weight around
most there the T code and Regulation and
things of that kind then you have a kind
of foreign policy Elite that has some
overlap with that but probably is
different in a way as well and then
you're talking about the culture War you
know the cultural kind of debates that
increasingly I think unfortunately have
come to dominate our
discourse and in large part it's because
the left has prioritized the culture War
if you go and watch watch left link
YouTube shows the most popular ones or
read uh or listen to left link podcasts
which I do part of my job and I think
you know it's necessary for me to kind
of stay in touch with every political
sector the extent to which the culture
more generally and gender ideology and
trans issues in particular reive the
bulk of the attention is almost shocking
to me I mean leftwing politics
traditionally in the 20th century was
about opposing imperialism and
militarism and corporatism and oligarchy
and now there's almost none of that I
mean there's on the left you wouldn't
even know there's a war in Ukraine you
wouldn't even know there's a foreign
policy that is almost entirely ignored
in favor of this kind of fixation on
trans issues and gender ideology right
now one of the longest standing and
biggest leeling YouTube shows The Young
Turks is in the process of being utterly
decimated and cancelled and they've had
views over the years that from a left
perspective are completely anatha but
since they're about war they love matal
and
Albright no one cares about that they're
being canceled because they cross the
one line you can't cross on the left
which is questioning some of the most
outer fringes of extremism trans
ideology including whether or not
biological men should be able to compete
in women's sports whether puberty
blockers are safe for children where
even in northern Europe they're debating
those
things and the intolerance
for any kind of of vibrant questioning
or dissent even from people who you know
say I think trans adults should be able
to live their lives with total dignity
with full legal rights that's nowhere
near enough you have to affirm every
last uh element of that agenda in order
to even be deemed acceptable it is
incredibly repressive and I think at the
end of the day when you talking about
who the elite is it's kind of on the one
hand a vague term but it's also not that
difficult to identify who's it's the
views that are
permitted and the views that are
suppressed and if your views are among
the views that are
suppressed that's a pretty good
indication that you are not in the elite
you you seem to be making a well you
seem to be making I I would say a
two-fold categorization on on the one
hand we have what we've always had and
which and it's something that always
poses a threat to the Integrity
of states that have to continually adapt
which is the tendency of those who have
been successful economically to bend and
distort the system in a manner that
supports their continued
hegemony independent of their continued
productive activity and I I kind of
think about that in general as the
problem of outof control gigantism and
you can see that on the government front
just as much as on the corporate front
you know famously in 2008 the Mantra was
too big to fail and I always thought
that the mantra should have been so big
you will certainly fail and then there's
this additional element that you point
to and use the example of what's
happening to The Young Turks at the
moment on the gender front pointing out
that there's a an elite that are
possessed by a set of ideological ideas
that have degenerated in recent years
into an almost monomaniacal fixation on
gender and identity and then there's
some Unholy alliance between the two you
know which which which I don't quite
understand um although it seems to be
manifesting itself you know it's it's a
variant perhaps of
the willingness of the coercive left not
that the rightwing was like without
error error on this front to Ally
themselves for example with big Pharma
and as you pointed out to
increasingly adopt a positive attitude
towards the very
secretive and background gigantic
government operations that the left
would have been historically opposed to
so I don't understand the alliance
exactly like I don't exactly understand
how the ideological possession that
manifests itself as emphasis on the
Primacy of group identity can be in bed
with the people who are using their
economic power on the regulatory capture
front maybe it's something like maybe
you see something like this on the ESG
front is where the
the power elite so that would be Larry
Fink and the black rock types are
willing to use the moralistic ideology
of the radical left to hide their what
to hide their guilt and to hide their
machinations on the power front is that
a reasonable way of construing it I'm so
glad we're we're talking at this at the
end here because it's so fundamental to
these changes in in the political
landscape the fact that you for example
were censored by Google while you were
interviewing RFK Jr and been censored
before and people who believe what you
believe on the question of trans
ideology and gender ideology are
censored routinely by Google and
Facebook and the pre- Elon regime of
Twitter whereas nobody would ever be
censored by big tech for being as
Extreme as you want to be on trans
issues urging that 12y olds be uh given
puberty blockers or that young girls get
masectomy the minute that they decide
that they're dysphoric obviously no
one's getting censored for being on that
side of the debate you see the
manifestation be there so suddenly you
are this leftwing culture Warrior who
likes to think that you're antagonistic
to Capital and yet the largest and
richest corporations are completely on
your side on these debates in fact
they're your enforcers yeah I noticed
this for the first time when we right
after we did this snow in reporting in
2015 so it was about two years after it
began the British version of the NSA
which is the gch Q really probably the
most extremist in this five eyes
Alliance they're sort of the ones that
do the things that not even the NSA will
do when they can't go far enough under
the law or ethics the gchq steps up and
do it does it in 2015 they bathe their
futuristic headquarters in the colors of
the rainbow flag declared lgbtq day
apologized for their treatment of some
of the gay code Breakers including Allen
Turing during World War II and then
suddenly began embracing in the left's
cultural agenda now the CIA does it the
FBI does it they all celebrate women's
day and LGBT day and every one of the in
corporations obviously do it too and
therein you can see exactly what these
institutions of power perceive is in
their Interest Who to side with and who
not to side with and you know you look
at who gets censored you look at who
corporations are endorsing what these
institutions of militarism and
surveillance are the the flag they're
waving and the ones they're not waving
and it's not difficult to see what is a
lead opinion and what isn't and whether
it's because it's cynical maybe there is
part of that like oh we know if we wave
the rainbow flag and we're the CIA that
will get the left to embrace us more or
whether it's just the fact that the new
Elite leaders in Western institutions of
authority have become True Believers of
these causes probably some division of
bold ultimately it doesn't matter the
fact of the matter is that establishment
power including capital is on the side
of the left and the culture war and as a
result they have become this kind of
bullying faction that no longer really
opposes large scale financial
institutions or corporate power or or
militaristic power because they perceive
correctly they're on their side and
they're their allies well I think that's
probably a good place to end you know we
we managed to tie things together there
at the end I mean I guess I would maybe
I'll add one more comment you know it
it's struck
me that the best camouflage for
Psychopathic manipulators and those are
PE those are people who will do anything
instrumental to advance their own narrow
self-interest um a well documented group
let's say on the psychometric and
psychological front the best camouflage
for assiduous instrumental
self-promoters who are willing to
manipulate others say using fear and to
acrw power themselves is compassion is
the guise of compassion you know and
what that means too is that the the that
corporate male feance can cover itself
up by allying itself with the useful
idiots of the compassionate left and and
I don't mean the people who are using
compassion necessarily on the left as a
manipulation in and of itself I think
there are plenty of people who do that
but the people who are naive enough to
assume that a show of compassion means
the real thing and the fact that those
enablers exist and I think the Democrats
by the way are rif with such people
means that the real manipulators at the
levels of um operating at the levels of
undeserved and untoward corporate power
governmental power for that matter can
manipulate entire populations by
claiming to be compassionate while going
about their normal business which is the
acrel of power to themselves and I think
that accounts for that Unholy Alliance
you know and that strange alliance
between because it is a strange alliance
between the the
left which historically in its best
manifestations did provide a voice for
the dispossessed for the Unholy alliance
between the modern left and the
corporate and gigantic
government well between the corporations
and the gigantic and the gigantic forces
of government and media so that seems to
be where we're at now and it's it's not
it's not obvious how you conceptualize
that or oppose it within the confines of
the classic divisions between right and
left right it's a whole new landscape
that's presenting itself to us and it
seems to require new
conceptualizations exactly I mean you
know that's why I think there's
confusion sometimes about my ideology
and others ideology the Atlantic just
called RFK Jr the first MAA Democrat
whereas you know when when RFK Jr is
critiquing a lot of the uh institutions
that had long been the primary targets
of the left including the US Security
State and big Pharma and the US war
machine but now that codes his rightwing
I also think to just add very quickly to
what you said as as the kind of just to
tie it all together is I think identity
politics is used very similarly to how
you just described the social justice
causes and the way that they're uh
cynically uh employed by these instit
the power to give the appearance that
they're on the side of the left and they
become actual allies of the left
obviously if you just change
demographically the people who are
running these institutions so that now
you have a black woman who's in general
or you have a latino man who's the CFO
of a major corporation it casts the
appearance that there's been some kind
of a radical change for those casually
looking when in reality it's just kind
of the the costume that they're Dawning
in order to continue doing EX exactly
what they're doing and just to win new
supporters and it's incredibly effective
because ultimately so many people are
satisfied with the most superficial of
changes and are willing to embrace and
cheer any institutions of authority as
being their allies even though they're
continuing to do those things that they
always have done when they were once
their animes and that is exactly what is
causing this new political
landscape hey well you know that seems
like a very good place to end so for
everybody watching and listening I'm
going to talk to Glenn for another half
an hour on the daily wire plus side
we'll conduct some investigation into
the manner in which the interests that
he's displayed fairly consistent
interests really over what almost uh
it's it's a long period of time now 30
years really pretty consistent interests
in um protection of free speech for
example that looks like it's your
Paramount concern and then Associated
interest of All Sorts on the political
and cultural front so we'll delve into
the Genesis of those those um
preoccupations on The Daily wire plus
side and if you're inclined to go over
there and have a listen or a watch you
know that that might be useful for you
and productive for us um as Glenn
mentioned and I mentioned during this
podcast YouTube has been on our case to
a fairly intense degree in the last
couple of months U me to some degree
because they've censored three of my
podcast and I suspect will censor a
number of the other ones that I have in
the can um and really gone after a
number of the people that I'm working
with or alongside of at least um at the
daily we plus so if you're inclined to
throw them some support this is probably
not such a bad time to do it in any case
we're going to head over there thank you
to the film crew here in Northern
Ontario for facilitating this and Glenn
for talking to me today and for sharing
what you've been investigating with
everybody watching and listening and to
everyone who is watching and listening
thank you very much and uh well we'll
see you on the next part
thanks Glen thank you appreciate it
[Music]